1. why have two options for name of the image file or to enter image structure
   parameters?
2. what are X-Y-Z coordinates, X-Y-Z coordinates of what?
3. why have two places to put the solved X-Y-Z coordinates?
4. what is meant by the term solution?
5. what is meant by include points with all z values, points that describe
   what?
6. is initial angle of rotation the same as "Angle of rotation of the tilt axis
   in the image" in the other programs?  Why is it described from vertical, I
   would assume vertical to mean in the z-direction (along the optical axis of
   the microscope)
7. why is the above parameter called initial is it some sort of guess or
   starting point?
8. The set of parameters when choosing automap for tilts appears to be a different
   structure than that of magnification and the other variable to be estimated.  But
   the man page implies that are of the same structure.  The man page entry for the
   automapped tilts is:

	  IF 5 to 8 was selected, next enter the default number of views to
	      group together, and the number of ranges of views that should
	      have some grouping other than the default.  If a negative number
	      of views is entered, then reshoot sets will NOT be segregated
	      from the rest of the views in this default mapping.
	  
	      IF you entered a non-zero number of ranges to be treated
	   	 separately, then for each such range, enter the starting and
	   	 ending view number and the number of views that should be
	   	 grouped in that range.	 If a negative number of views is
	   	 entered, then reshoot sets will NOT be segregated from the
	   	 rest of the views in this range.
   

   that would appear to look something like:
   
   nDefView,nOtherRange
   otherRange1
   otherRange2
   :
   :
   otherRangeN
   

   The man page entry for automapping of the magnifications is:

   	  0 to fix all magnifications at 1.0,
	      or 1 to vary all magnifications independently,
	      or 2 to specify a mapping of magnification variables
	      or 3 or 4 for automapping of variables; 3 for linearly changing 
	      values or 4 for values all the same within a group 

	  IF 2 was selected, enter a magnification variable number for each
	      view.  As for tilts, these variable numbers can be completely
	      arbitrary.  The reference view (typically the one at minimum
	      tilt angle) will be constrained to a mag of 1.0; to constrain
	      any other views to a mag of 1.0, simply map them to the same
	      variable number as for the reference view.

   	  IF 3 or 4 was selected, enter default group size, number of special
	      ranges, and group size for each such range just as for tilt
	      variable automapping.   


   I am not sure exactly how this would appear, what is meant by group size, that
   does not seem to coincide with the tilt automap description
   

9. How is it decided when the "transformations are being computed" is it the same 
   state as putting the transformations in the output file (entry #7)?

	
10. What is the purpose of having an entry for the number of view sets to treat
    separately and the following list (the entry follwing the rotation angle
    solution selection entry) as well as having this for type of question for
    each type of solution?
    
11. In the first stage of running tiltalign the documentation seems to imply
    that we are attempting to solve for the tilt angles.  But, the
    documentation also says that we should "set # of the reference view..."
    which appears to be the magnification reference view.  In the first stage
    what should we be solving for?
	
	