These directions are intended for Sawfish novices.  If you are a more
experienced user but just getting IMOD set up, look through the "WINDOW
MANAGER PROPERTIES" section, and be sure to make the two changes under
"Moving and Resizing".

SETTING THE FONT

     When you first log in and open a terminal window, the default font
is obnoxiously small, and may be displayed in gray on black, so you'll
want to change this.

     Under the Settings menu entry on the terminal window, select
Preferences.  The "gnome-terminal" window comes up.

     Press Browse... to set the font.  The "Pick a font" window comes
up.

     Under "Font:", find and select "fixed (misc)".  Then under "Font
Style:", find "iso8859-1" (in gray).  Yes, there are a lot of iso8859
fonts, but only this last one seems to have a decent font that can be 13
or 14 points.  Pick "medium [C]", then pick a size of 13 or 14 depending
on your preference.

     Press OK in this window, then Apply in the "gnome-terminal" window.

     Next select the colors tab.  With "Color scheme" set to "Linux
Console", you may like "White on black" or "Black on light yellow".  For
a real back on white, or other choices, select "Color Xterm".  You will
then have to select "Custom colors" and set the Foreground and
Background colors by hand.

SETTING WINDOW MANAGER PROPERTIES

     Next you should change some features of the Sawfish window manager
in the Gnome Control Center, selected with the Toolbox icon in your task
bar.  (The panels can also be selected from the Gnome menu under
Programs-Settings-Sawfish Window Manager.)  In the menu on the left is a
section under "Sawfish window manager" that has the entries for selecting the
panels of interest.  When you change the settings in a panel, press the "OK"
button before selecting another panel to minimize confusion.

"Focus behavior" panel:
     "When does the mouse pointer affect the input focus": If you are
used to the way focus changes when you move the pointer into a window on
the SGI, you will want this to be "enter-exit".  If you are used to
clicking a window in order for it to take input, you may want "click",
but you may or may not find it annoying to use Imod in this mode.

     "Focus windows when they are first displayed": 
     "Dialog windows inherit the focus from their parent": 
If your focus is set to "enter-exit", you will probably want these both
OFF, because otherwise it violates the logic of the window under the
pointer having the focus.  It's tempting to leave the second one ON,
because you almost always want to type into a dialog window after
bringing it up; however, even this can get confusing in Imod.

"Moving and Resizing" panel:
     "How windows being moved are animated": SET THIS TO BOX. 

     "How windows being resized are animated": SET THIS TO BOX.

These two settings are crucial for keeping Imod from getting bogged down
by numerous redraw events when you move or resize windows.

"Placement" panel:
     "Method of placing windows": You might want to play with this;
"best-fit" and "interactive" are useful.  But first set the "Ignore..."
button below.

      "Method of placing dialog windows": You will probably want to set
this to something other than "centered-on-parent", so that control
windows in Imod do not come up right over your image window.

     "Ignore program-specified window placements": Turn this ON to have
Imod windows show up somewhere besides the upper left corner.

     "Automatically remember window positions, sizes, or other
attributes": You should leave all of these OFF, otherwise Imod windows
will come up with inappropriate sizes.

THE TASKBAR AND WORKSPACES

     Sawfish provides for multiple workspaces, or screens, that can be
switched between easily by typing Alt-F1, Alt-F2, etc.  The taskbar, or
control panel, maintains a list of open windows in the current
workspace.  You can bring a window forward or de-iconify it by clicking
one of these buttons.  There is also a little cartoon of all of the
windows in whichever workspaces have been accessed so far in your
session, and you can click one of these window representation to access
a window as well.

     Initially, the taskbar is set up to sit at the bottom of the
screen, rather than autohiding below the bottom.  With this setting, you
may find that when you log in, the taskbar is in the middle of screen.
Switching to a different workspace and back, or pushing one of the
arrows on the end of the taskbar, will get it to the bottom the screen
where it belongs.

     To set the taskbar to autohide, access the "Paw" in the taskbar,
and select "Panel", "Properties", "Hiding policy", and "Autohide".  Then
go back to the Gnome Control Center and select the "Panel" entry under
"Desktop".  Select the "Miscellaneous" tab and turn OFF "Keep panel
below windows".  This will give you the best of both worlds, in that
your windows can occupy the full screen length yet you will be able to
access the panel without moving windows.  However, this button setting
is inappropriate if autohiding is left off.
