<pre>
                      SERIAL SECTION ALIGNMENT WITH IMOD

     This document gives an overview and some background information on the
tools available in IMOD for aligning images from serial sections.  First there
is a description of the transformations that are used for aligning images and
the ways that their parameters are represented.  There follows an explanation
of why it is necessary to process transformations before they can be used to
align serial images.  Three ways of obtaining transformations are then
described, followed by a more detailed explanations of the options for
processing transformations for particular kinds of data sets.

Linear Transformations
     Two images can be aligned by applying a coordinate transformation to
one image to make the transformed image match the other image as well as
possible.  The transformations used for alignment are general linear
transformations.  This means that the same amount of translation, rotation or
distortion happens everywhere in an image.  Our programs use three different
ways of representing transformations.  The parameters in these different
representations are referred to as "formal", "semi-natural", or "natural".

     The formal parameters are the matrix coefficients that are actually used
to transform image coordinates.  There are six formal parameters in a linear
transformation: the new X-coordinate of a point is a linear combination of its
old X and Y coordinates, plus a constant offset, so three parameters determine
the new X-coordinate; similarly, the other 3 parameters determine the new
Y-coordinate.  The equations are
     X' = A11 * X + A12 * Y + DX
     Y' = A21 * X + A22 * Y + DY
 For example, if the image is rotated by some angle theta, A11 and A22 are
cos(theta), and A21 and A12 are sin(theta) and -sin(theta).  In general, the
DX and DY correspond to X and Y displacements of the image after the rotations
and distortions specified by the A matrix.  The disadvantage of the formal
parameters is that the geometrical changes in the image (rotation, size
change, and stretch) are all mixed together in the four matrix parameters.
This makes the transformation hard to interpret intuitively, and also prevents
programs from treating different kinds of changes in different ways.

     The semi-natural parameters partly alleviate these difficulties by
expressing the A matrix in terms of a global rotation, a global magnification,
a difference between the rotation of the X and Y axes, and a difference
between the stretches along the X and Y axes.  This is done quite easily
because two of the parameters (A11 and A21) specify how a unit vector along
the X-axis is transformed, which directly indicates how much the X-axis is
rotated and stretched by the transformation.  Similarly, the other two matrix
parameters (A12 and A22) indicate how much the Y-axis is rotated and
stretched.  The global rotation is the average of the two axis rotations, and
the global magnification is the average of the two stretches.  Although the
stretch is not expressed very intuitively, the effects of the different
changes have been separated out in the semi-natural parameters, so they are
used by programs that need to treat the different changes differently.

     The natural parameters are the most intuitive ones: global rotation,
global magnification, and stretch along an axis at a particular angle.  These
still constitute four parameters because stretch amount and stretch axis angle
are two separate parameters.  One can directly convert these four natural
parameters into an A matrix with equations that involve lots of sines and
cosines.  Given an A matrix, it is also possible (but even more complex) to
solve for the corresponding natural parameters.  Most of the programs used for
alignment deal only with the formal transform parameters; a few programs work
with the semi-natural parameters; and the program that provides interactive
adjustment of alignment allows one to specify changes in the fully natural
parameters.

     Transforms stored in a file are represented by formal parameters.  Each
line of the file specifies:
   A11   A12   A21   A22   DX  DY

F and G Transforms
     Whenever there are more than two images, a series of transforms will be
needed to align the whole stack of images.  This series is obtained in two
stages.  First, each successive pair of images is considered separately, and a
transform is found that aligns the images when applied to the second image in
the pair.  This procedure yields a list of transforms that align each image to
the previous image; the programs consistently refer to this as a list of "f"
transforms.  Simply applying these f transforms to all of the images in the
stack will not help, because each section would be aligned to the previous one
only if that previous one were not itself transformed.  For example, consider
the following example of 3 sections that need to be shifted into alignment in
one dimension.  Here is a side view of the sections, where we need to align
the + marks in each section.

 2  ---+------+-----
 1  -+------+-------
 0  ------+------+--

The pairwise comparison of sections indicates that 1 must be shifted 5 units
to the right to align it to 0, and 2 must be shifted 2 units to the left to
align it to 1.  Performing those operations would give:

 2 -+------+-----__    f: DX = -2
 1 _____-+------+--    f: DX = +5
 0 ------+------+--    f: DX =  0

(Here, the underscores _ represent empty or non-existent image.)  The
misalignment here indicates that a second stage is necessary: one must obtain
the transforms for each image that will produce an aligned stack when actually
applied to the images.  This list is consistently referred to as a list of "g"
transforms.  In our example, the appropriate g transforms produce a proper
alignment:

 2 __---+------+---    g: DX = +2
 1 ____-+------+---    g: DX = +4
 0 -----+------+--_    g: DX = -1

In summary, f transforms align each section to the preceding one; g transforms
align each section to the whole stack.

     There are three general methods for obtaining alignment transforms:
automated search for the best fit between two images, solving for a transform
from a set of fiducial points that correspond between two sections, and manual
adjustment of transformation parameters while viewing the two sections.  The
latter methods were developed because the automated method is not always
sufficient.

Automatic alignment
     The shell script Xfalign will do automated alignment of a set of serial
sections; it runs a number of programs, but the main tool that it calls is the
program Xfsimplex.  Xfsimplex varies the six transformation parameters until
it finds the best "fit" between two images.  It has two alternative ways of
measuring fit: a difference measure and a distance measure.  The difference
measure is just the sum of the absolute values of pixel-by-pixel differences
between the two images.  This measure is appropriate if the features that
correspond between the two images are relatively large or comprise a
substantial fraction of the image area.  The distance measure attempts to
deduce alignment when features suitable for alignment are relatively small or
few; it is not used by Xfalign.  Two important factors governing the success
of Xfsimplex are: 1) appropriate pre-processing of the images (Xfalign uses
fourier filtering by the Enhance program); and 2) proper choice of the
parameters for Xfsimplex, particularly of the distance versus difference
measures and of whether to reduce the size of images by two in X and Y.  See
the man pages for Xfalign and Xfsimplex for more guidance on this.

     Xfsimplex will normally search for the values of the six formal
transformation parameters, but one can select a mode in which it will search
for the six semi-natural parameters or selected subsets of them.  Unless one
wishes to vary only a subset of parameters (e.g. displacement only or
displacement, rotation, and uniform magnification only), the semi-natural
parameters seem to present no advantage.

     In the simplest case, one would invoke Xfalign with 
    xfalign sections.st sections.xf
 which would find search for alignments between the images in "sections.st"
and output the f transforms into the file "sections.xf".

     Because Xfsimplex does an iterative search for a local optimum in the
fitting measure, it cannot find the right alignment if there is a big initial
displacement between the images.  Xfalign has an option to do an initial
cross-correlation, which will find the displacement that gives a global
optimum in the correlation between the images.  These displacements are then
passed to Xfsimplex, which searches with them as a starting point.  This
option can be invoked with 
     xfalign -pr sections.st sections.xf
 Another alternative, if cross-correlations do not work well, is to run Midas
initially (see below) and use it to quickly shift the images into approximate
alignment.  Xfalign can then be told to use these initial alignments, rather
than trying to find initial alignments by correlation.  If the f transforms
produced by Midas are in the file "sections.prexf", then this option can be
invoked with
     xfalign -in sections.prexf sections.st sections.xf

Generating or Editing an Alignment with Fiducial Points
     The program Xfmodel can solve for the parameters of a transformation
between sections from the locations of points that are known or assumed to
correspond between the sections.  Xfmodel works with a model of connected
fiducial points built in 3dmod.  In the simplest case, if you built a model
of fiducial points named "sections.fid", you would just enter
     xfmodel sections.fid sections.xf
  to compute a list of f transforms.  By default, it will solve for the full
linear transformation, but there are also options to solve for translations
only, translations and rotations, or translations, rotations, and
magnifications.  Although it is most common to use this method to align an
entire image stack, one can also use Xfmodel to "edit" an existing list of f
transforms.  That is, if one enters fiducial points for a subset of
troublesome sections, the program will solve for the transforms for those
sections only, and replace those transforms in the existing list.  Xfmodel can
also be used to transform a model to a new alignment (see below).

Manually Editing an Alignment 
     The program Midas provides for interactive visualization and manual
adjustment of the alignment between two images.  It can be used to edit a list
of f transforms.  By using Midas, it is not necessary to build an aligned
stack to assess the quality of transforms produced by automatic alignment.
The program will take the unaligned images, apply any existing transforms,
such as those generated by automatic or fiducial alignment, and allow the user
to manipulate each transform.  It works with the fully natural transform
parameters.  Midas can be invoked with
     midas sections.st sections.xf
 which will load in images from "sections.st".  If "sections.xf" is an
already-existing file of f transforms, you can then edit the transforms in
that file; if the file does not exist, it will be defined as the output file
into which transforms will be saved.

Converting from an F List to a G List
     As discussed above, to get from the list of f transforms to a useful
stack of aligned images, one must first convert them to g transforms using the
program Xftoxg.  This will produce transforms that can be used to transform
each section into a common alignment.  Xftoxg has several different ways
of doing this, depending on whether you want to preserve or eliminate trends
in the data.  The following series of examples will illustrate the treatment
of trends.  Suppose we have sections with a progressive shift of positions:

 3  --+------+--------
 2  ---+------+-------
 1  -------+------+---
 0  --------+------+--

To get g transforms that will align all of the images to a single average
position, and eliminate the progressive shift, run Xftoxg with the option 
"-n 0" as follows:
   xftoxg -n 0 sections.xf
 This entry takes advantage of a feature of Xftoxg: you do not have to enter
an output file name if the input file name ends in "f".  This command produces 
a file "sections.xg" of g transforms, which when applied to the images, would
give:

 3  ___--+------+-----
 2  __---+------+-----
 1 ------+------+---__
 0  -----+------+--___

This result is generally usable if there are relatively few sections and if
you do not care about the image that is lost off the edges for sections
farther away from the center of the stack.  However, if there are a large
number of sections (say, > 50), the shifts can accumulate unacceptably.  Also,
there may be cases in which the cues that are used for alignment actually
should progress across the image area through the sections.  To avoid these
problems, it is possible to have each section aligned to a "local" average
alignment based on a linear fit to trends in the transformations for the
nearby sections.  This procedure will retain the trends but align adjacent
sections as well as possible by eliminating deviations from the trends.  This
is the default mode of operation of Xftoxg, invoked by
   xftoxg sections.xf
 and the resulting transforms in sections.xg would give:

 3  --+------+--------
 2  _---+------+------
 1  ------+------+---_
 0  --------+------+--

     The situation is more complex if there are trends in rotation or size.
Rotation trends can occur because of curvature of the ribbon of sections, or
because of progressive rotation of the features used for alignment.  Trends in
size can easily occur when using Xfalign, if the features that govern the
alignment change size progressively through the series.  Here is a series of
sections with such a size change:

 3  --+--x--+-----------
 2  --+---x---+---------
 1  -----+----x----+----
 0  -----+-----x-----+--

Aligning to a single central position with the "-n 0" option is clearly
inappropriate here because it squeezes the images at one end of the stack and
expands them at the other:

 3  _---+----x----+-----
 2  __--+----x----+-----
 1  ----+----x----+----_
 0  _---+----x----+--___

Aligning to a single central position tends to convert features of interest
into a right cylinder, regardless of their true geometry.  Again, we can avoid
this problem and retain all trends with the default entry to Xftoxg, with the
following result:

 3  --+--x--+-----------
 2  _--+---x---+--------
 1  ----+----x----+----_
 0  -----+-----x-----+--

This may be an acceptable alignment, especially for very large numbers of
sections.  However, it is frequently desirable to eliminate the trend in
lateral displacements, particularly for images acquired on a CCD camera on the
microscope or digitized by a method that does not provide a good preliminary
alignment.  To handle these situation, there is a hybrid or mixed alignment 
method that will eliminate trends in position but retain trends in size.  It
is invoked by
    xftoxg -m 2 sections.xf
 The resulting transforms applied to the sections give the desired result
and avoid distorting the sizes of the objects:

 3  ____--+--x--+-------
 2  ___--+---x---+------
 1  ----+----x----+----_
 0  ---+-----x-----+--__

If you use hybrid alignments, you need to decide whether to eliminate or
retain any trends in rotation.  Rotations are probably artifactual and should
be eliminated if they are simply due to rotation of images during acquisition
or digitization.  However, automatic alignment with Xfalign may be dominated
by features that actually rotate within the volume, in which case rotation
trends should be preserved.  For example, a tightly packed bundle of
microtubules may have a twist, and if these microtubules dominate the
alignment, the alignment will contain a progressive rotation that should be
preserved.  Use the "-m 2" option to retain rotation trends or "-m 3" to
eliminate them.

Creating Transformed Images
     Given a list of g transforms, the program Newstack will transform the
images to create an aligned stack.  This program can also "float" the images
to have a common range or mean of intensity, change the size of the images, or
extract a portion of the images.  See the man pages for Newstack for more
information or enter "newstack -h".  Newstack used to be run by a shell
script, Newst, but now takes command line arguments itself.  You can still
enter "newst" to see a simple summary of the major Newstack options.  A simple
example, which will float the images to the same mean intensity and contrast,
is
    newstack -xf sections.xg -fl 2 sections.st sections.ali
 Here, "sections.xg" is your file of g transforms produced by Xftoxg, "-fl 2"
specifies floating to mean, "sections.st" is your input stack of unaligned
images, and "sections.ali" is your output stack of aligned images.

Working with Montaged Images
     If you have serial images each consisting of a montage of overlapping
frames, as can be acquired with SerialEM, then you need to follow different
procedures for getting an initial stack to align, and for getting an aligned
stack.  The first step is to extract a text file with a list of the X, Y, and
Z coordinates for each frame, called a piece list.  Do this with
    extractpieces sections.st sections.pl

Next, get a copy of a command file for running the program Blendmont, which
can analyze the overlapping image area between adjacent frames and compose a
single image for each section.  Do:
    cp $IMOD_DIR/com/sloppyblend.com .

Edit this file, replacing "g5a" with the root name of your data file
("sections", in our example here).  If you acquired the montage with stage
shifts instead of image shift, you should change the entry "SloppyMontage" to
"VerySloppyMontage".  Now run the program by entering:
    subm sloppyblend

It will run in the background, and a message will be printed when it finishes.
The output file is named sections.bl.  Open this in 3dmod and see if the
frames appear to have fused properly.  Also, unless you have a 1xn or nx1
montage, examine the log from Blendmont, in the file sloppyblend.log:
    less sloppyblend.log

For each section, you will see a line like
 8 edges, mean&max error before:  25.22  88.08, after by edges:   1.24   3.06

The two numbers on the right are the ones that indicate whether the pieces
line up well after being shifting into registration as well as possible.  If
these numbers are large (more than a few pixels), it is likely that one or
more of the correlations used to align adjacent pieces in that section has
failed.  If this seems to have happened, then open the file in Midas in order
to fix the alignment between pieces:
    midas -b 0  -p sections.pl sections.st sections.ecd 

In Midas, you can go to each troublesome section and examine each of the
overlap zones, adjusting the ones where the pieces do not line up.  See the
section "Fixing Montage Overlaps" in the Midas man page.  After fixing
overlaps, save the shifts (this saves a new copy of sections.ecd).  Then edit
sloppyblend.com and change the 0 to a 1 on the line "ReadInXcorrs".  Rerun
the program with subm.

     Once you have a blended stack, you can use the same procedures on it that 
were described above with sections.st to align the stack.  Once you have a set
of g transforms, edit slopyblend.com again to apply these transforms to the
original stack in the blending operations.  To do this, 1) change the name on
the ImageOutputFile line from ".bl" to ".ali"; 2) remove the "#" before
"TransformFile"; 3) change "g5a.xf" on that line to the name of your g
transform file ("sections.xg").  Then rerun sloppyblend, and you will get an
aligned stack.

Realigning Images and Models
     Sometimes one will find after modeling on a set of images that the
alignment needs to be improved.  There are several tools that can be used to
get a better alignment.  The operations to run depend first on whether you
are going to go back to the original data or operate on the aligned data.

1) You can go back to the original data and modify the f transforms, or
rerun Xtftoxg with different parameters to get different g transforms.  
First make a copy of the xf file:
    cp sections.xf sections.newxf
 If you want to fix f transforms, you would probably do this by running midas
on the raw stack:
    midas sections.st sections.newxf
 After adjusting the alignment or not, you would rerun Xftoxg (using whatever
parameters you used before, or new ones if appropriate), for example:
    xftoxg sections.newxf
 This will give you a new file of g transforms, "sections.newxg".  Making a
new aligned stack it easy; just rerun the newstack command with this new file
instead of the old "xg" file.  To transform a model into alignment with these
images, run
    xfmodel -pre sections.xg -xf sections.newxg sections.mod sections.newmod
 The "-pre" argument tells Xfmodel to back-transform the model by the old g
transforms, which aligns it to the raw images, before transforming it by the
new transforms.

2) Suppose you work from the already aligned images or a model on them, and
derive a set of f transforms that would improve their alignment, in the file
"sections.xf2". These need to be converted to g transforms, but then
transforming the model is easy:
    xftoxg sections.xf2 sections.xg2
    xfmodel -xf sections.xg2 sections.mod sections.newmod
 However, to get a new aligned stack, you should go back to the raw stack
instead of applying a second transformation to the aligned stack.  To do this,
you need to multiply the first and second set of g transforms and apply the
product:
    xfproduct sections.xg sections.xg2 sections.prod
    newstack -xf sections.prod sections.st sections.newali
 However, if you have a montage, instead of running Newstack, edit
sloppyblend.com to change "sections.xg" to "sections.prod" and rerun
Blendmont.

There are several ways that you could work from an existing model to get
a refined alignment.  One way is to take Tiff snapshots of the Zap window in
3dmod through the entire set of sections, with either the model displayed on
the images or just the model showing on a black background.  (You can take
such snapshots automatically with the Edit-Movies dialog box.)  Stack the
Tiff files into a single color MRC file:
    tif2mrc zap*.tif zapstack.mrc
 Midas can read this file and display the colors in gray scale, allowing you
to adjust the alignment based on model features:
    midas zapstack.mrc sections.xf2

An existing model can also be used to provide a new fiducial alignment,
provided that it has features that have been modeled across the sections.
For example,
    xfmodel sections.mod sections.xf2
 There is a script, Selfalign, that will do this operation as well as realign
the model, producing new f transforms in a ".selfxf" file, new g transforms
in a ".selfxg" file, and a new model ending in ".selfmod".  Aside from
convenience, the script has the advantage that it can be given a limited 
number of sections over which to find the alignment, and it will properly
handle the transitions between the regions being realigned and those being
left as they were.
</pre>
